STAC-22870: add reference docs and guide for otel component and relation mappings (#159)
rancher/stackstate-product-docs: docs/latest/modules/en/pages/setup/otel/otelmappings/README.adoc

ifdef::ss-ff-stackpacks2_enabled[]
= Getting Started with Open Telemetry Mappings
:revdate: 2025-12-23
:page-revdate: {revdate}
:description: Overview of Open Telemetry Mappings

SUSE Observability can automatically derive application and infrastructure topology from OpenTelemetry (OTel) telemetry data.
This is achieved through OpenTelemetry topology mappings, which declaratively transform trace and metric signals into topology components (vertices) and relations (edges).

== Overview

> At a high level, topology generation from OpenTelemetry works as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a high-level, topology generation from OpenTelemetry works as follows:
```

* OpenTelemetry telemetry (metrics and/or traces) is received by the Collector
* The OTel collector uses a topology connector that evaluates configured mappings against the telemetry
* When mapping conditions match telemetry, components and/or relations are produced

> * These topology objects are consumed by the `sync` service and merged into the topology graph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* These topology objects are consumed by the `sync` service and merged into the topology graph.
```

* Mappings are declarative, YAML-based, and evaluated continuously as telemetry flows through the system

Currently supported signals:

* Metrics
* Traces

Log-based topology generation is not yet supported.

> The xref:/setup/otel/otelmappings/concepts.adoc[concepts] page provides more details about component and relation mappings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on component and relation mappings, see xref:/setup/otel/otelmappings/concepts.adoc[concepts] page.
```

= Getting Started with Open Telemetry Mappings
:revdate: 2025-11-26
:page-revdate: {revdate}
:description: Overview of Open Telemetry Mappings

SUSE Observability can automatically derive application and infrastructure topology from OpenTelemetry (OTel) telemetry data.
This is achieved through OpenTelemetry topology mappings, which declaratively transform trace and metric signals into topology components (vertices) and relations (edges).

These mappings allow you to describe what topology should be created from telemetry.
They are evaluated as part of the topology pipeline inside the OpenTelemetry Collector.
The resulting component and relation objects are emitted downstream and later materialised by the SUSE Observability platform once the required vertices are available.

== Overview

At a high level, topology generation from OpenTelemetry works as follows:

* OpenTelemetry telemetry (metrics and/or traces) is received by the Collector

> * The topology pipeline evaluates configured mappings against the telemetry

Reviewer 2: The collector evaluates I would say. The whole thing is the pipeline so that's a bit unclear.

* When mapping conditions match, components and/or relations are produced

> * These topology objects are consumed by the platform backend and merged into the topology graph

Reviewer 2: The collector is also part of the platform, so maybe we should be very specific here: the `sync` service consumes them and merges them into the topology.

* Mappings are declarative, YAML-based, and evaluated continuously as telemetry flows through the system

Currently supported signals:

* Metrics
* Traces

Log-based topology generation is not yet supported.

> The xref:/setup/otel/otelmappings/concepts.adoc[concepts] page provides more details about component and relation mappings.

Reviewer 2: Good question. I think we should make this part of the `stackpack` creation somehow to guide people in that direction instead of ad-hoc changes via the separate cli commands. So maybe we should simply assume its part of a stackpack (make that clear up front) and use the `stackpack test` command. 

Detailed docs of those commands come in another PR then.

> The xref:/setup/otel/otelmappings/concepts.adoc[concepts] page provides more details about component and relation mappings.

Reviewer 2: It would be much nicer if the example would actually work in SUSE Observability as well. Maybe we should take an example that is similar to what SUSE Virtualization, Kubewarden, or SUSE AI want to do or are doing: add some extra components and connect them to the existing services or service instances (similar to how we do k8s pod already in the OTel stackpack). 

This doesn't have to be super useful (if it was it would be already in the stackpack), so we may need to look a bit at span / resource attributes that are available on most/many traces in Kubernetes. Maybe a  `process`  component is a good example. Process attributes are part of almost all span resource attributes, and we can make a relation to the service instance.
